I cannot believe that classes, yes,
JavaScript classes are one of the best
ways to handle reactivity in the modern
web. In my last video, I was talking
about a lot of the big issues spelt has
in 2025. And one of the big issues is
that there is only one component per
file. But this problem has been
massively alleviated because of the new
runes primitives and how those fit with
stores and classes and how you can put
all these together to make some really,
really cool stuff. So, in this video, I
wanted to go over a couple examples of
how that works, show you what the mental
model for this looks like, and all of
the examples and stuff I go over here is
fully open source. It'll be linked down
below. And yeah, let's get into it. So,
spelt's classes and stores. I think the
best place to start here is with how
this actually works without our classes
and stores. For the entirety of this
video, I'm just going to be assuming
we're working in spelt kit. You can use
spelt without spelt kit, but frankly, I
don't think it's very good. If you
wanted to do SPA stuff, Spelkit has that
built in. If you want to do SSRE server
side type stuff, spelkit also has that
built in. It just feels like the best,
most mature, well put together way to
work with spelt in 2025. So, we're going
to be talking about that. So, oftent
times what will end up happening is
we'll have our page.spelt here. Uh
within the page.spelt, we'll have a
spelt component. And these spelt
components are composed of a script, uh
the markup, and the styles.
All three of these coexist together
within the page.spelt, but we can only
have one of each of these. It's the
single component per file problem. And
this means that we have to put all of
our logic in the script. We have to put
all of our markup in here. And if we
wanted to split these things out, we're
going to have to end up using another
component, which means another file. So,
we could take this here. We could uh
duplicate this over here. We could call
this um to-dos.spelt. spelt and then we
can import this new component up in our
script tag and then mount this down
within our original markup. This system
is fine. It's not the most ergonomic
thing ever. I don't particularly love
it, but this is generally how you had to
do things in spelt 4 before the new
runes primitives. But spelt 5 introduced
the runes. We have our state rune, our
effect rune, our derived rune, the
inspect rune, and a couple more, but
these are the key important ones. And
what's really cool about these is we can
obviously use these inspel files within
the script to handle our reactivity, but
we can also use these inspel.ts files to
create stores. And that's what I wanted
to talk about here. So let's take our
original example up here. Let's grab
this guy. Let's copy this and paste it
down here. And let's say for this
example, we wanted to abstract out a lot
of the logic within our script. This is
a surprisingly common thing I want to
do. I like to have my scripts be simpler
to understand and especially when you're
working with something more complicated
like D3 or you're doing some backend
logic to fetch data or something like
that. It can get really big, really
bloated and kind of hard to reason about
and work with. So what we can do is we
can create a new file over here and we
will call this uh to-dos
state.t.ts. And what we can do with this
to-dos state.selt.ts ts is we can put
all of the logic for working with our
to-dos in here using a class. So within
this
to-dos.sel.ts, I'm going to create a
class in here. So we'll call this to-do
state. This will be a class. And within
this class, we're going to have a couple
of different fields. We're going to have
all of our to-dos. We're going to have
add to-do. And with this new to-do
state.spel.ts, we can import this up
into our script tag up here. And then we
can create a new to-do state class
within our script and then use the
to-dos method and the add to-dos method
down within our markup while having full
reactivity because of the runes. Like I
said, I made a full example for this.
It's linked down below, fully open
source if you want to see the source
code for how I actually do this stuff.
And the first example I made here is a
basic little chat app. So we have this
right here. I can put some text in and
we'll get a random fake response back.
None of this is it's not doing any
server side stuff. It's just to
illustrate how the state actually works.
And the code for this is incredibly
simple. We go into our store here and
you'll see we are importing our chat
state class. We're creating a new chat
state right here. We and then within our
actual markup here, we're grabbing our
messages off of chat state and we're
grabbing the send message off of chat
state. It's all encapsulated into this
nice little class box here. And then if
we go into our chat state.selt.ts, the
way I actually implement this is with a
class. The way I like to start these
things is with an interface. I'll just
define, okay, these are the things I
want this to have. I want this to have a
messages field. I want this to have an
is loading field and I want this to have
a send message field. Then we can go
ahead create the class that implements
our interface. And the first two things
I do is I create my messages and I
create my loading. And what's really
cool is we're using the state rune here,
which means that these messages and this
is loading are normal reactive state
variables just like if we had
initialized these within the script tag
of our page.spelt. Then down here I have
my fake responses. I have my said
message which will mutate all those
state variables. So we'll set is loading
to be true. We'll push to our messages
and then after 400 milliseconds we'll
push the fake assistant uh response and
then set is loading to be false. This
makes encapsulating and reasoning about
client side logic so much easier,
especially when I'm working with
something more complex like a D3 type
thing or if I have to do a lot of
complex back and forth with a server or
if we wanted to share the state between
components, we can because we're
creating stores. Now, in this example,
we are initializing the store within our
actual script tag. If we go back over to
our diagram here and look at sort of how
this actually works, we can imagine we
have the spelt tree. So let's say we
have um a normal little spelt app here.
Let's say we have up here make this dash
we have our plus layout uh spelt and
then we have uh two pages on this. We
have one
page.spelt and then we have
another page.spelt. And in the example I
just provided there where we have our um
state here. We'll just use the to-do
state example. We're actually
initializing this to-do state within
this page. felt. So, this guy is getting
put inside of here. So, if we wanted to
access the to-do state in this page or
within this layout, we can't because all
of that logic is being encapsulated
within this one page. That's what's
happening here because we're creating
the instance of that chat state within
this component. We can't share that
between components. But if we wanted to
share these things, we could go ahead
and create an actual store for these
things. So, we'll just call this over
here um store. We'll have this store
over here which is an instance of this
to-dos state class and then we can
access this within any of these
components and they will be tied to the
same thing. So whenever we mutate the
state within one of these page.spelts it
will be mutated on the store which is
shared in between them using context.
And the way this looks is with this
example I have this little example here
where if we increment this counter all
of these counters get incremented
together. I go to the subpage and that
state is shared between them. We'll
decrement this a bunch. Go back to the
context and they're all decremented
together. The code for this is very
similar to the other. We create our
interface. We create our counter state
um class. We have our reactive count
variable, our increment and our
decrement. But what's different is down
here we're creating these two functions
called get counter state and set counter
state. Effectively what these are doing
is the set counter state is creating the
context or creating the store which is
shared. The important thing to remember
here is that spelt works like a tree.
The layout is the parent of the pages
and then the pages are the parent of the
components which they import. So going
back to our diagram here, when we're
creating our store, we actually want to
be creating the store within our
layout.spelt and then we get our store
within these two pages. So we're going
to call set counter state within the
layout, then get counter state within
the actual pages or components to work
with it. So if we go into our
layout.sell here, we're setting our
counter state. Then if we go down into
our page here, we're just importing a
bunch of these counter components. And
if we look at our counter component
here, we are calling get counter state
to get access to that class. And these
are all tied together because they're
all tied to the same context. And the
way context work is it's keyed. If we
wanted to create multiple of these
counter stores within the same tree that
are not tied together, we could provide
them with uh different keys. In this
case, I'm just setting them all to be
the default key of this like dollar
counter state whatever thing. So in this
case, whenever we call get counter state
with no arguments, we're getting this
one. When we set counter state, we're
setting this one. So down here within
our counter state, it works exactly the
same as the initial example did. We have
our increment, we have our decrement,
and we have our actual count right here.
It's all reactive. It all just works,
and it's really, really nice. If you're
doing anything with SSR, it is really
important that you don't just create a
new counterstate class within this and
export it and then import it between
those. That can create really weird
leaking with serverside rendering that
you don't want to deal with. Make sure
if you want to share these between
components, you are doing it using
context. And that's it. That's all you
have to do to create a fully reactive
store in spelt 5. That is much richer
than what you were previously able to do
with the readable and writable syntax.
This is very similar to the React
context API except it's much much nicer
to work with. This is an incredibly
useful thing to have. I'm working on a
project right now where one of the
things I want to have is a global toast.
And what we can do is we create this
toast component that is tied to our
toast store. Within our toe store, we
have an open function, a closed
function, and then anywhere within our
app because within our uh apps tree
here, within our root layout right here,
um we're setting our toast store, which
means that we now have access to it
anywhere within our app on any of these
components. I can just call get toast
store and then toast store.open and it
will open up that store because we're
mounting the toast component within our
layout. You can do crazy things with
these and it is uh it just feels so good
to work with. Once you get the mental
model of this down, it's hard to go back
to working with anything else. I have
not wanted to touch React entirely
because of these. This has solved spelt
for me and I highly recommend playing
with these things. Like I said, the
example is open source. It's linked down
below. If you enjoyed this little
breakdown on how these things work, make
sure you like and subscribe. I'll have
more Spelt content coming soon as well
as a bunch of weird effect stuff and
random things I'm working on. And yeah,
until next time, write more salt